And he said, my idea of democracy is that that is a
government run by the people and for the people.
And I said, that's
very close to my views, sir. He said, well, then
tell me, how can you run a democracy in a country
where 87% of the people can't participate. Our
literacy rate, 87% can't read and write. How can
they participate?
So they need to be told, they need to be led. So what
we're trying here is democracy for 13% of the
people and 87% zero, nothing. but yet your country
demands that we do that in order for us to get aid and
he says I'm going to take over this government
and I said he said I'm going to follow the
principles in which you have outlined here today
even to moving the troops I laid out to him I laid out
to him a
principle of first off, if you're going to take
over a country and want the support of outside
influence, don't kill anybody unless you have to.
It must be, you just don't do it. I said, I will judge
your success by the number of people that you don't
kill. He said, I understand. I said, that's you'll
get internal support and you'll get external
support if you don't do that.
I said another principle is the disposed
should be handled in such a way that that they exist
after this is all over with. I said Another thing is
grab the communication center and start talking
to the people and tell them exactly what you're
doing and why because they deserve the right to
know why you're doing this and what you expect what
they should expect from the outcome.
We went through where the key communication
centers are, Karachi and Lahore, and what the
likely things to do in Dhaka at that time, because
you had East Pakistan, where to dispose your
soldiers, support you should ask for from the,
from the malas, from the leaders in the villages
who, from where the soldiers come, mostly.
opposition politicians don't let them don't lock
them up unless it's absolutely necessary but if
they do start interfering lock them up don't
punish them just lock them up get them out of the way
until you get yourself stabilized
after about four hours He was satisfied. This was
on March the 6th, 1958.
And he said to me, he said,
if you want to tell my friend Alan Dulles, you feel
free to do this.
Did you tell the head of the CIA? Yes. What did he,
how did he respond? He said, you have a military
mind and it isn't going to happen. That's what he
said to the general or to you? Said to me. He wrote
back and said that? Yes. You have a military mind
and it's not going to happen? Yeah, and that was
also a reaction of the political newspaper
Eisenhower appointee ambassador. Who was the
ambassador at that time? He was a sad one, but I
can't think of his name. He ended up in a newspaper
out in New Hampshire. Oh my God. He had an alcoholic
wife. I can't think of a worse selection to
represent a president anywhere than he was, but I
can't remember his name. Why do you say that? He was
just totally inept? Well, I think inept is he knew
nothing about what? About Pakistan. Yeah. Just
political appointee. Kind
of like you said, you know, we won't discuss this
anymore. He said, I'd like to Feel free to come talk
to you on this, Mary Ann, in case I need to. I said,
yes, sir. Well, you must have had an Air Force
colonel there and a MAG team, and you must have had
an AP, a captain probably, didn't you? Yeah,
right. And did you inform those people? Did you
talk to those people about this? No way. No way.
They weren't as close to the general as you were,
obviously. Oh, there wasn't anybody in the
country as close as I was to IU. Well, why do you—why
you? I mean, how did this come about? Well, we were
1,200 miles away from everybody else and he had
confidence in mobility.
Because the others were in Dhaka? The others were
in Karachi. Oh, okay. That's where the MAG
headquarters was. And we saw each other almost
every day, not every day, but that's the reason for
it. I told the mag chief. He said, I don't believe
it. Who was the mag chief? He was a brigadier
general? No, he was a major general. He's still
alive. I know you're making him look bad. Okay, he
didn't believe it. And the CIA didn't believe it.
The CIA didn't believe it. Army attache said, I'll
report it, but
I can't think it'll happen. So,
thank you, ma'am. So, that cup, I guess. Thank you
very much, Mr. Donaldson. So,
you use sugar in this? No, thank you, sir.
I don't need to tell you this, but when you see the
13th Lancers moving to where you said they should
move
on a training exercise, then you'll know things
are imminent. So on the 5th of October, the 13th
Lancers moved from Queda to Multan.
was scheduled to go to visit that regiment in
Queda.
And we got a call on the 4th of March. Now wait a
minute, you're in first, you said March. I mean
October. You were in October, right? I'm talking
about October. Okay, the first meeting was in
March. March the 6th. Yes, and okay, and so now. So
then on the 5th of October,
The 13th Lancers moved to Multan, and on the 4th of
October, we got a message from the headquarters at
GHQ, which we were a part of. We had a building there
in the general headquarters of the Pakistani
forces. We got this message requesting us to delay
our visit to the 13th Lancers. because they had
U.S. equipment, you see, and we'd go inspect it to
see how well they were doing about their training.
So
my deputy, Lieutenant Colonel Watson, said, I
can't understand. We ought to go back and
intercede here. We've got a schedule set up, and
we've got to follow this schedule. I said, no, they
don't want us to go out there at this time, so we're
not going. Did you tell your deputy about your
earlier conversation? Oh, no, I never told
anybody. Just Dulles? Pass the word to Allen
Dulles.
And
I did that through the ambassador. Yeah. But then
word never got to Allen Dulles. Oh, really? No.
Word never got to the United States. I thought you
said earlier that no one believed you. They
didn't. Ambassador didn't believe me. But you
gave the word to the ambassador. He was supposed to
report to Washington. Absolutely. He never did
report this. No. So neither did the MAG chief.
As far as I know. Or if they did, they just cast it
aside. So at 2 o'clock in the morning on the 6th of
October, a coup came.
I talked to now Prime Minister, President IU many
times thereafter.
He said, you know, he said, Holly, one of the most
critical times in my life was when I called the
Commonwealth of Nations and the ambassadors of
the United States together at 2 o'clock in the
morning to tell them what was going on.
and said, right down the line, the ambassador from
Australia said,
President Ayub, you have my country's total
support. Great Britain, you have my country,
ambassador, you have my country's total support.
New Zealand, all the way right on down the line.
Canada. Come to the United States. And that
ambassador said, Well, what happened to Umrah?
Why wasn't Umrah promoted? Well, now listen to
this. Umrah is either a brigadier general or a
major general over command in a division in East
Pakistan in which our intelligence agencies and
so on and so forth thinks a real great guy. How do you
spell his name? Umrah, U-V-M-H-R-O. And
they were sold on, this guy. Yeah, and here, and
General Ayub says, Ollie, here at a time of crisis,
and all the important ambassadors and all the
support I needed, that I needed, I get from one of
the prime countries in the world,
a question as to why I didn't promote some general
officer. Said, this is unbelievable.
I said, Mr. President, I'm not surprised. And
I wasn't surprised. I can't think of that joker's
name. We've had so many jokers as ambassadors,
political appointees, you know, all over the
place.
God, I can't think of his name now. It's so
insignificant that you try not to remember the
insignificance, you know, because there's so
many important things and so many good people to
remember.
Write
to the letter and I congratulated him after he was
all over with. Only one guy was killed and as the
light tanks of the 13th Lancers were moving in
Karachi
to the radio station They excited a camel cart and
the camels broke loose and run over the camel
driver in the street with a wagon and killed him,
not from gunfire.
He took Iskander Mirza, who was the prime
minister, his whole family, whole household, his
whole group of kids this and that and all kinds of
hands and all that loaded them in the airplane and
sent them to England and they're still in England.
How long did he lock up any opposing political
parties, leaders? Uh, you know believe it or not I
think he had the general respect and support of
those people and it wasn't until he began to get
sick and he was failing in health
until he got a little bit cross purposes with some
of the civilian people over there. When you've got
a country of 14 or 15 different damn parties and no
leadership amongst any of them. What a shambles.
Mrs.
IU was still living.
And is that why you've maintained very close
contacts with the military? in Pakistan and why
you go back every once in a while and talk to the new
president? I guess so. The new president was a
major in what they called a guides cavalry. That
was probably the most famous cavalry unit in the
world. It was British, Pakistani, British
Indian, and then Pakistani.
President Zia was a major in the Guides Cavalry,
and I'm very fond of those officers there. The
Pakistan Military Academy is a two-year academy
patterned after Sandhurst, and they do a
tremendous job in selecting people for PMA, and
for the curriculum there is followed almost
completely. but with nationalistic conditions.
But fighting after the British was one of the best.
Did you have any mixed feelings about your
dealings? For a couple of reasons. First, you're a
military representative and not a political
representative or usually military mag
personnel. deal somewhat in politics, but not
very much, and second, you are a representative of
a country that's always attempting to export
democracy, and so proud of its democracy, and here
what you're doing eventually leads to the end of a
democracy, even though it was a weak one, and the
rise of a dictatorship. Did you have any mixed
feelings about your role? No, because you just had
to You have to take our foreign policy
and you just cannot
allow it to destroy the common sense aspects of a
democracy.
You can't be, you can't allow a democracy to be so
damn foolish
and so damn wrong that you make our whole country
look bad in trying to implement that policy in a
part of the world where there isn't a single person
with any common sense and sound judgment knows
that that's what's right for that country and
their people. You just can't do that.
for people who are not schooled who can't handle it
and that's what we have consistently done and this
is where I'm consistently opposed to this sort of
thing now we tried our best he said what are you how
do you get around this business of democracy here
now and when we're trying to do something for these
people
I said, well, you've got to keep preaching
democracy at the same time and practice it at every
instant that you possibly can.
But at the same time, do something to enhance the
welfare of the mass of the people in this country.
And I said, I think you can do it. I think you can take
over this country without denying the rights of
everyone. And I said, avoid that, denying the
rights people deserve. Now, some people don't
deserve any rights.
Some people display themselves in such a fashion
they don't deserve any rights.
Does a criminal deserve a right to run up and down
the streets out here shooting at people and so on
and so forth? What kind of rights was that? Don't
you think that you deserve a right to walk up and
down the streets of Dallas after midnight without
being shot at? Huh? Can you get that? Is that right
available to you today? I hope so. But it isn't.
Probably. You understand? Yeah, I understand.
You see what I'm talking about? So, uh... You know,
I like to look at these countries like this. What's
best for the country? Yeah, okay. What's best for
the country? Now, after the general became the
president and took over the country, tell me about
your relationship with him then. They more or less
ceased because he was out of them. military role
other than commander-in-chief and they more or
less dropped off except for social and for well
hunting and that sort of stuff. He would still
invite me to go with him hunting and so forth but we
never sat down and had any military conferences
because now you got a new commander-in-chief,
General Musa, M-U-S-A, who was his deputy and he
was promoted to the commander-in-chief. So then
my relationship switched directly to General
Moussa again. That's the way we worked at it. So, in
other words, you didn't advise him? No, none at
all. None at all. After he became president and
prime minister, he moved to Karachi,
where the seat of the government was, and I had no
more official contact with him on his social.
One might think that he might offer you some sort of
a position behind the scenes with the government,
but he never did. No, and he knew that I wouldn't
accept it anyway because he was as much a soldier as
I am. He knew. He knows what the rules are. Well, I
meant, you know, as an alternative to your
military career. Oh, well. Like General
Chenault, working for China. Yeah. Before.
Right, sure, sure. That never happened in my life.
Okay, okay. I was wondering about an issue that
happened earlier, but one that relates to the idea
of who is commander-in-chief, the politician or
the general, and that is the General MacArthur and
Harry Truman episode. It does have some parallels
here to what happened in Pakistan. What was your
feeling on that episode? Did you think Truman
acted correctly?
The president,
by law, is a commander-in-chief. I'm a
law-abiding person and I believe in a civilian
rule and I believe in a political two-party
system. I hope we don't get many more parties than
that. I believe in our whole Constitution, the
whole layout, all aspects of it.
That doesn't mean that there may be some portion of
it that may come up sometime that needs to be
changed. I'm not against change, but I am against
just change for change's sake. I think there must
be a good specific reason that's impacting
unfavorably on them on the totality of our people
before you go change the Constitution, of course.
But I've always looked up to the president, and
always will, and I stand by whatever decision he
makes, and I hope that he provides me an
opportunity, if I'm in the right position, to
participate before the decision is made. and
express my views one way or the other through now
the members of the Congress or by written word or
oral or whatever it might be but after the decision
is made I think that everybody must
this is what I believe democracy is is
participating But after the decision is made,
then you support the higher authority. And I think
a general, I think anybody can serve too long
and become too over-viewed
with his presence.
publicly or officially.
And I think General MacArthur was long overdue for
retirement.
And
I would have thought that his better judgment
might have dictated that to him.
So, I support Mr. Truman one thousand percent.
If a man doesn't come up and say, it's obvious Mr.
President, you and I are not getting along here,
I'm going to step down because I know you're not and
let's do this very quietly and get on with it, okay?
What's wrong with that approach? After 50 years in
the uniform, you're supposed to leave at the end of
30.
So, I support President Truman. Okay. Now, why'd
you leave Pakistan? Your tour of duty was up.
Usually it's a two mags, or usually two years. Your
duty is up, and I was a colonel, and I was due for
command. Okay, okay. And you got a deputy
commander, Combat Company A. Combat Company A,
1st Armored Division. Where was that? That was at
Fort Hood. Okay. Fort Hood, and then you had that
for about nine months, and then you became Chief of
Staff of the 2nd Armored Division, also at Fort
Hood. Right. That was my old World War II division.
Okay. Okay. What were you doing there, training?
Training completely, totally training, right.
We had a full division there, and we were training
in Europe. The division at the time I was there was
scheduled for Europe, and we were putting forth
all of our efforts toward deployment to that area
in case of a national emergency.
Okay, and then in August of 1961, you got a new
assignment. Was that because Kennedy was
elected? Yes, yes. Now tell me how that came about.
Well that came about after I had completed this
year or 18 months down there at Fort Hood. It came
about that then I have to go to high staff, highest
level staff. That's what I'm scheduled for next.
high-level staff at the cabinet level, and so I was
selected, approved by the Secretary of Defense to
come to high-level staff positions, and after out
there a little while, and then I became,
they were satisfied, then that's when I was given
the political appointee slot.
And one of the key
points there during that four years was Cuban
Crisis, in which I was involved in the manpower
aspects of that and the calling of the reserves.
Okay, so you were Deputy Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Reserve and Manpower from August 1962
until October 1965. Right. Okay, let's start off
right away. Your boss is, who is your immediate
supervisor? My immediate supervisor is
Assistant Secretary of Defense Norman Paul,
P-A-U-L.
Okay, and of course his boss is McNamara. His boss
is McNamara. Okay, now there's a heck of a lot of
controversy about McNamara, and sometimes I hear
from many generals their dislike for McNamara.
Some people have surprised me and told me what a
wonderful guy he was. He's very controversial.
You worked with him closely. What's your opinion?
Well, I thought that Mr. McNamara was a very smart
man who
was taking on a hundred billion dollar or more
operation,
who was trying his damnedest to bring some sense of
management to an unmanageable organization
wherein you have three services fighting each
other for a few dollars and that
would not, even if they got all of it, would not
satisfy the total requirement.
A job that,
well I can't think of a tougher job than being
Secretary of Defense other than being President
of the United States. And McNamara
received much criticism, very little praise.
But overall,
you have to give the man credit for fostering what
the Colonel DeVolt had attempted to do by starting
to build a conventional deterrent and to maintain
some balance in the strategic deterrent and
modernizing the theater nuclear deterrent and at
the same time fighting a war in Vietnam and trying
to fight that war and his theory was we ought to end
that war
with not one nickel spent beyond what it cost to run
that war in other words When the war is over, when
the ceasefire comes, or whatever it is, whoever
wins, loses, or draws, the inventory should be
zero at that point in time. Of course, that's where
I disagreed with him, because that indicates that
that is the last of all wars, in which it's wrong, in
which your security capability drops back to
zero. And you can't afford that. But that's the
dollar aspect of it. What kind of person was he? Can
you give me sort of a description of his character?
I think he liked a lot of independence. He didn't
like too many people around. I think he
had utter disregard for people. I mean he had no
sense of feeling for people at all. They were just
something else. They were tools.
No sense of feeling for people, and no sense of
respect for the political side of America. He
thought the politicians are all little gimmicks,
or he thought of things, you know,
insignificance, and that sort of thing. And that
caused him a lot of misery. But that's, when you
treat them, When you treat the politicians as a
bunch of little kids, you know, that you can slap
and kick around, or dogs, that's what you get.
You're asking for it. Absolutely. And he got it.
But I liked the man. He never harmed me. He'd only
help. He had very high standards of performance.
And anybody that performed well stayed there.
General Haig was there as lieutenant colonel. I
was there as a colonel. Alexander Haig was there as
a lieutenant colonel? Oh yeah. Oh yeah. He worked
for Mr. Joe Califano, who was chief special
assistant to Mr. McNamara. And that's when I
learned, that's when I knew Joe Califano. What did
you think of him? Just one hell of a guy. Smart, just
a tremendous guy. What did you think of Haig?
Phenomenal lieutenant commander and battalion
commander. He was one of my battalion commanders
in Vietnam in my division, Division G3, Chief of
Operations as a lieutenant colonel. And he was
really good? Oh, absolutely. Absolutely best.
Absolutely the best. Why? Smart, very intense
from the standpoint of learning and retention,
burning desire to succeed, warm personality,
respectful of others, seniors and subordinates
alike. Hello, man. I saw him there. Oh, you did? Oh,
yeah. He invited me over to his house. I went over to
see him. I spent about 45 minutes with him. Oh,
where is he? He's in Washington. He may eventually
be in Texas.
Why do you say that? He may say, he could, you know,
accept a position down here someplace.
Um, He was a hell of a guy, a hell of a battalion
commander.
I know he was promoted because of his relations
with politicians. He was promoted over about,
what, two or three hundred senior people. Oh,
yeah. Was there some envy or jealousy or
grumbling? Always some. Always, yeah, always
some. Like the President's Chief of Staff. He's
out of Class of 50. Shire Meyer, he was The black
secretary jumped him over several hundred.
Those things happened.
But again,
you see, you must support the system and the
authority of the President of the United States or
you've got nothing. you have absolutely nothing
and no security you've got to do that within the
armed forces. Now let's talk about this job
itself. You're in a political position here.
You're an assistant secretary. This is, you know,
the deputy secretary or assistant secretary is—
political appointee. That's true. And not a
military position. This is really rare in
American history. That's true. This might be the
first case. You must have had, being in this
political slot, and being a colonel, you must have
had generals who were superior. Is that not true?
That's true. I'm surprised you didn't have to
resign your commission for this.
Tell me about the difficulty that you had, or the
position itself. I tell you, I guess
that it does seem
somewhat
out of order in the system.
However,
I guess it's the techniques you use and how you
avoid disorder and try to gain confidence and
cooperation.
And I've prepared many memorandums.
particularly on the reserves, and sent to the
Secretary of the Army, and the Navy, and the Air
Force, and which were directive in nature that the
four-star generals and the three-star generals
probably didn't like worth a damn. But all they had
to do was to complain to their secretary, and he
could go complain to Mr. McNamara and get thrown
out
so you see when you ask me about Mr. McNamara
when you work for him and he supports you you have
his loyalty and respect and confidence you just
get on with it and whether they like it or not
and come up number 66 on three brigadier lists and
they only go down and promote 64 each year, you
know, for three years. You can be on the damn list,
and they'd throw the list out and start all over.
And is that what happened? There's some of the
things that happened, yeah. Well, tell me about
that. You were numbers, when you came up for
Brigadier General, you were number 66 on the list?
Yeah, first time, and they promoted down to number
63, I guess, and they threw the list out. you know,
for next year and start all over. So, a new board
comes in with slates
and you end up maybe this year number 65 or
something and they only promote 60. That's all the
slots that come open. So, you come up again for
promotion. You only come up about four times. And
you come up every year? Yeah, you come up every year
for four years for the general officer. And then
last time you come up and you're number two on the
list. You get promoted almost immediately when
the list comes up. And so that's what happened.
That could be some praise.
Oh, God, you know, I don't complain about that. I
know about all that sort
of stuff. In other words, Mr. McNamara was really
happy with the quality of work that you were doing.
Yeah, he was very happy. In fact, I had my first
Distinguished Service Medal, my first medal that
they normally reserve for general officers,
which is the highest award you can get in service,
Distinguished Service Medal. was when I was a
colonel.
Why do you think that you were, when you first came
up, the first time you came up for general, why do
you think that you were number 66? Especially
considering your career. Yeah, I think because
whoever was on that board, whoever the six
generals were on that board liked 65 guys better
than they did me. Maybe one of those guys on the
board, I don't know, was the one that I forced a
memorandum down his throat to get something done
that he didn't like. You see what I mean? That's all
it takes. Records be damned. Records be damned.
he could have said to the other five boards I
wouldn't promote that son of a bitch he sends a
goddamn memorandum down here raising hell with us
on this that and the other because we did this wrong
that wrong I wouldn't promote that bastard for
anything and the others say well I don't know him
but he's got a hell of a good record right hell with
his record
you know It's, you know, what we're doing here is
dealing with people. Sure, right. And I don't
blame a damn bit. Who do you think I am?